Your pancreas is a long slender organ that lies
behind the stomach and intestines, near the spine.
This delicate but vital gland
is responsible for regulating your bodies
blood sugar with hormones such as insulin,
and for helping breakdown food with digestive enzymes.
The pancreas is divided into four parts:
the head,
the neck,
the body,
and the tail.
When cancer develops in the body or
tail of the pancreas,
your surgeon performs a distal pancreatectomy
to remove the cancer.
This surgery may also be used
to remove premalignant masses within the pancreas.
Before beginning a distal pancreatectomy
a patient is put under general anesthesia.
Your surgeon will then make
one or more incisions in the abdomen.
Depending upon the preferred approach.
Subcostal,
midline,
or through several small incisions,
known as a laparoscopic or robot-assisted approach.
The cancerous tissue in the tail or
distal end of the pancreas,
is identified and removed.
The spleen, an organ involved in filtering the blood
and helping the immune system,
shares its blood supply with the tail of the pancreas.
This often necessitates the removal of the spleen,
splenic artery,
splenic vein,
and overlying lymph nodes,
along with the tail of the pancreas.
This is known as a distal pancreatectomy
with splenectomy.
This operation can also be done without
removing the spleen for noncancerous
or premalignant masses.
A distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy
is usually very successful at eliminating
cancer within the body or tail of the pancreas.
It is a major operation,
that usually takes 3-4 hours.
Most patients are fully recovered and back
to daily routines within a week.